CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

This repository relates to activities in the Internet Engineering Task Force
([IETF](https://www.ietf.org/)). All material in this repository is considered
Contributions to the IETF Standards Process, as defined in the intellectual
property policies of IETF currently designated as
[BCP 78](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp78),
[BCP 79](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp79) and the
[IETF Trust Legal Provisions (TLP) Relating to IETF Documents](http://trustee.ietf.org/trust-legal-provisions.html).

Any edit, commit, pull request, issue, comment or other change made to this
repository constitutes Contributions to the IETF Standards Process
(https://www.ietf.org/).

You agree to comply with all applicable IETF policies and procedures, including,
BCP 78, 79, the TLP, and the TLP rules regarding code components (e.g. being
subject to a Simplified BSD License) in Contributions.


## Other Resources

Discussion of this work occurs on the
[tsvwg working group mailing list](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tsvwg/)
([subscribe](https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/tsvwg)).  In addition to
contributions in GitHub, you are encouraged to participate in discussions there.

**Note**: Some working groups adopt a policy whereby substantive discussion of
technical issues needs to occur on the mailing list.

You might also like to familiarize yourself with other
[working group documents](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/tsvwg/documents/).

Commit message:

Move ref to tsvwg to Intro and add a link to the github repo to Abstract (#33)
* Move ref to tsvwg to Intro and add a link to the github repo to Abstract
* Rename repo URL

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

This repository relates to activities in the Internet Engineering Task Force
([IETF](https://www.ietf.org/)). All material in this repository is considered
Contributions to the IETF Standards Process, as defined in the intellectual
property policies of IETF currently designated as
[BCP 78](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp78),
[BCP 79](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp79) and the
[IETF Trust Legal Provisions (TLP) Relating to IETF Documents](http://trustee.ietf.org/trust-legal-provisions.html).

Any edit, commit, pull request, issue, comment or other change made to this
repository constitutes Contributions to the IETF Standards Process
(https://www.ietf.org/).

You agree to comply with all applicable IETF policies and procedures, including,
BCP 78, 79, the TLP, and the TLP rules regarding code components (e.g. being
subject to a Simplified BSD License) in Contributions.


## Other Resources

Discussion of the QUIC version of the draft occurs on the
[QUIC working group mailing list](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/quic/)
([subscribe](https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/quic)).  In addition to
contributions in GitHub, you are encouraged to participate in discussions there.

Discussion of the TSVWG version of the draft occurs on the
[tsvwg working group mailing list](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tsvwg/)
([subscribe](https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/tsvwg)).  In addition to
contributions in GitHub, you are encouraged to participate in discussions there.

**Note**: Some working groups adopt a policy whereby substantive discussion of
technical issues needs to occur on the mailing list.

You might also like to familiarize yourself with other
[QUIC working group documents](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/quic/documents/) and
[tsvwg working group documents](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/tsvwg/documents/).
