---
title: Packet Loss Signaling for Encrypted Protocols
abbrev: loss-bits
docname: draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-tsvwg-lossbits-latest
date: {DATE}
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: Loss Signaling
workgroup: TSVWG
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  compact: yes
  inline: yes
  text-list-symbols: -o*+

author:
  -
    ins: A. Ferrieux
    role: editor
    name: Alexandre Ferrieux
    org: Orange Labs
    email: alexandre.ferrieux@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Hamchaoui
    role: editor
    name: Isabelle Hamchaoui
    org: Orange Labs
    email: isabelle.hamchaoui@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Lubashev
    role: editor
    name: Igor Lubashev
    org: Akamai Technologies
    email: ilubashe@akamai.com
  -
    ins: D. Tikhonov
    role: editor
    name: Dmitri Tikhonov
    org: LiteSpeed Technologies
    email: dtikhonov@litespeedtech.com

normative:
  IP: RFC0791
  IPv6: RFC8200
  TCP: RFC0793
  ECN: RFC3168
  ConEx: RFC7713
  ConEx-TCP: RFC7786

informative:
  QUIC-TRANSPORT: I-D.ietf-quic-transport
  TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT: I-D.ietf-tsvwg-transport-encrypt
  UDP-OPTIONS: I-D.ietf-tsvwg-udp-options
  UDP-SURPLUS: I-D.herbert-udp-space-hdr
  ACCURATE: I-D.ietf-tcpm-accurate-ecn
  IPv6AltMark: I-D.ietf-6man-ipv6-alt-mark

--- abstract

This document describes a protocol-independent method that employs two bits to
allow endpoints to signal packet loss in a way that can be used by network
devices to measure and locate the source of the loss. The signaling method
applies to all protocols with a protocol-specific way to identify packet
loss. The method is especially valuable when applied to protocols that encrypt
transport header and do not allow an alternative method for loss detection.

--- middle

# Introduction

## Motivation for Passive On-Path Loss Observation

Packet loss is hard and pervasive problem of day-to-day network operation.
Proactively detecting, measuring, and locating it is crucial to maintaining high
QoS and timely resolution of crippling end-to-end throughput issues. To this
effect, in a TCP-dominated world, network operators have been heavily relying on
information present in the clear in TCP headers: sequence and acknowledgment
numbers and SACKs when enabled (see {{?RFC8517}}). These allow for quantitative
estimation of packet loss by passive on-path observation. Additionally, the
lossy segment (upstream or downstream from the observation point) can be quickly
identified by moving the passive observer around.

With encrypted protocols, the equivalent transport headers are encrypted and
passive packet loss observation is not possible, as described in
{{TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT}}.

Measuring TCP loss between similar endpoints cannot be relied upon to evaluate
encrypted protocol loss. Different protools could be routed by the network
differently and the fraction of Internet traffic delivered using protocols other
than TCP is increasing every year.  It is imperative to measure packet loss
experienced by encrypted protocol users directly.

## On-Path Loss Observation

There are three sources of loss that network operators need to observe
to guarantee high QoS:

* _upstream loss_ - loss between the sender and the observation point
  ({{upstreamloss}})

* _downstream loss_ - loss between the observation point and the destination
  ({{downstreamloss}})

* _observer loss_ - loss by the observer itself that does not cause downstream
  loss ({{observerloss}})

The upstream and downstream loss together constitute _end-to-end loss_
({{endtoendloss}}).

## On-Path Loss Signaling

Following the recommendation in {{!RFC8558}} of making path signals explicit,
this document proposes adding two explicit loss bits to the clear portion of the
protocol headers to restore network operators' ability to maintain high QoS.
These bits can be added to an unencrypted portion of a header belonging to any
protocol layer, e.g. IP (see {{IP}}) and IPv6 (see {{IPv6}}) headers or
extensions, such as {{IPv6AltMark}}, UDP surplus space (see {{UDP-OPTIONS}} and
{{UDP-SURPLUS}}), reserved bits in a QUIC v1 header (see {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}).

## Recommended Use of the Signals

The loss signal is not designed for use in automated control of the network in
environments where loss bits are set by untrusted hosts, Instead, the signal is
to be used for troubleshooting individual flows as well as for monitoring the
network by aggregating information from multiple flows and raising operator
alarms if aggregate statistics indicate a potential problem.

# Notational Conventions    {#conventions}

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{!RFC2119}}.

# Loss Bits

The draft introduces two bits that are to be present in packets capable of loss
reporting. These are packets that include protocol headers with the loss
bits. Only loss of packets capable of loss reporting is reported using loss
bits.

Whenever this specification refers to packets, it is referring only to packets
capable of loss reporting.

* Q: The "sQuare signal" bit is toggled every N outgoing packets as explained
  below in {{squarebit}}.

* L: The "Loss event" bit is set to 0 or 1 according to the Unreported Loss
  counter, as explained below in {{lossbit}}.

Each endpoint maintains appropriate counters independently and separately for
each separately identifiable flow (each subflow for multipath connections).


## Setting the sQuare Bit on Outgoing Packets {#squarebit}

The sQuare Value is initialized to the Initial Q Value (0) and is reflected in
the Q bit of every outgoing packet. The sQuare value is inverted after sending
every N packets (a Q Run). Hence, Q Period is 2*N. The Q bit represents "packet
color" as defined by {{?RFC8321}}.  The sQuare Bit can also be called an
Alernate Marking bit.

Observation points can estimate the upstream losses by counting the number of
packets during a half period of the square signal, as described in {{usage}}.


### Q Run Length Selection

The sender is expected to choose N (Q run length) based on the expected amount
of loss and reordering on the path.  The choice of N strikes a compromise -- the
observation could become too unreliable in case of packet reordering and/or
severe loss if N is too small, while short flows may not yield a useful
upstream loss measurement if N is too large (see {{upstreamloss}}).

The value of N MUST be at least 64 and be a power of 2. This requirement allows
an Observer to infer the Q run length by observing one period of the square
signal. It also allows the Observer to identify flows that set the loss bits to
arbitrary values (see {{ossification}}).

If the sender does not have sufficient information to make an informed decision
about Q run length, the sender SHOULD use N=64, since this value has been
extensively tried in large-scale field tests and yielded good results.
Alternatively, the sender MAY also choose a random N for each flow,
increasing the chances of using a Q run length that gives the best signal for
some flows.

The sender MUST keep the value of N constant for a given flow.


## Setting the Loss Event Bit on Outgoing Packets {#lossbit}

The Unreported Loss counter is initialized to 0, and L bit of every outgoing
packet indicates whether the Unreported Loss counter is positive (L=1 if the
counter is positive, and L=0 otherwise).  The value of the Unreported Loss
counter is decremented every time a packet with L=1 is sent.

The value of the Unreported Loss counter is incremented for every packet that
the protocol declares lost, using whatever loss detection machinery the protocol
employs. If the protocol is able to rescind the loss determination later, a
positive Unreported Loss counter MAY be decremented due to the rescission, but
it SHOULD NOT become negative due to the rescission.

This loss signaling is similar to loss signaling in {{ConEx}}, except the Loss
Event bit is reporting the exact number of lost packets, whereas Echo Loss bit
in {{ConEx}} is reporting an approximate number of lost bytes.

For protocols, such as TCP ({{TCP}}), that allow network devices to change data
segmentation, it is possible that only a part of the packet is lost. In these
cases, the sender MUST increment Unreported Loss counter by the fraction of the
packet data lost (so Unreported Loss counter may become negative when a packet
with L=1 is sent after a partial packet has been lost).

Observation points can estimate the end-to-end loss, as determined by the
upstream endpoint, by counting packets in this direction with the L bit equal to
1, as described in {{usage}}.


# Using the Loss Bits for Passive Loss Measurement {#usage}

## End-To-End Loss    {#endtoendloss}

The Loss Event bit allows an observer to calculate the end-to-end loss rate by
counting packets with L bit value of 0 and 1 for a given flow. The end-to-end
loss rate is the fraction of packets with L=1.

The assumption here is that upstream loss affects packets with L=0 and L=1
equally. If some loss is caused by tail-drop in a network device, this may be a
simplification.  If the sender's congestion controller reduces the packet send
rate after loss, there may be a sufficient delay before sending packets with L=1
that they have a greater chance of arriving at the observer.


## Upstream Loss   {#upstreamloss}

Blocks of N (Q Run length) consecutive packets are sent with the same value of
the Q bit, followed by another block of N packets with an inverted value of the
Q bit. Hence, knowing the value of N, an on-path observer can estimate the
amount of upstream loss after observing at least N packets.  The upstream loss
rate (`u`) is one minus the average number of packets in a block of packets with
the same Q value (`p`) divided by N (`u=1-avg(p)/N`).

The observer needs to be able to tolerate packet reordering that can blur the
edges of the square signal.

The observer needs to differentiate packets as belonging to different
flows, since they use independent counters.


## Correlating End-to-End and Upstream Loss    {#losscorrelation}

Upstream loss is calculated by observing packets that did not suffer the
upstream loss. End-to-end loss, however, is calculated by observing subsequent
packets after the sender's protocol detected the loss.  Hence, end-to-end loss
is generally observed with a delay of between 1 RTT (loss declared due to
multiple duplicate acknowledgments) and 1 RTO (loss declared due to a timeout)
relative to the upstream loss.

The flow RTT can sometimes be estimated by timing protocol handshake
messages. This RTT estimate can be greatly improved by observing a dedicated
protocol mechanism for conveying RTT information, such as the Latency Spin bit
of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Whenever the observer needs to perform a computation that uses both upstream and
end-to-end loss rate measurements, it SHOULD use upstream loss rate leading the
end-to-end loss rate by approximately 1 RTT. If the observer is unable to
estimate RTT of the flow, it should accumulate loss measurements over time
periods of at least 4 times the typical RTT for the observed flows.

If the calculated upstream loss rate exceeds the end-to-end loss rate calculated
in {{endtoendloss}}, then either the Q Period is too short for the amount of
packet reordering or there is observer loss, described in {{observerloss}}. If
this happens, the observer SHOULD adjust the calculated upstream loss rate to
match end-to-end loss rate.


## Downstream Loss   {#downstreamloss}

Because downstream loss affects only those packets that did not suffer upstream
loss, the end-to-end loss rate (`e`) relates to the upstream loss rate (`u`) and
downstream loss rate (`d`) as `(1-u)(1-d)=1-e`. Hence, `d=(e-u)/(1-u)`.


## Observer Loss   {#observerloss}

A typical deployment of a passive observation system includes a network tap
device that mirrors network packets of interest to a device that performs
analysis and measurement on the mirrored packets. The observer loss is the loss
that occurs on the mirror path.

Observer loss affects upstream loss rate measurement since it causes the
observer to account for fewer packets in a block of identical Q bit values (see
{{upstreamloss)}). The end-to-end loss rate measurement, however, is unaffected
by the observer loss, since it is a measurement of the fraction of packets with
the set L bit value, and the observer loss would affect all packets equally
(see {{endtoendloss}}).

The need to adjust the upstream loss rate down to match end-to-end loss rate as
described in {{losscorrelation}} is a strong indication of the observer loss,
whose magnitude is between the amount of such adjustment and the entirety of the
upstream loss measured in {{upstreamloss}}. Alternatively, a high apparent
upstream loss rate could be an indication of significant reordering, possibly
due to packets belonging to a single flow being multiplexed over several
upstream paths with different latency characteristics.


# ECN-Echo Event Bit   {#ecn-echo}

While the primary focus of the draft is on exposing packet loss, modern networks
can report congestion before they are forced to drop packets, as described in
{{ECN}}. When transport protocols keep ECN-Echo feedback under encryption, this
signal cannot be observed by the network operators. When tasked with diagnosing
network performance problems, knowledge of a congestion downstream of an
observation point can be instrumental.

If downstream congestion information is desired, this information can be
signaled with an additional bit.

* E: The "ECN-Echo Event" bit is set to 0 or 1 according to the Unreported ECN
  Echo counter, as explained below in {{ecnbit}}.

## Setting the ECN-Echo Event Bit on Outgoing Packets {#ecnbit}

The Unreported ECN-Echo counter operates identicaly to Unreported Loss counter
({{lossbit}}), except it counts packets delivered by the network with CE
markings, according to the ECN-Echo feedback from the receiver.

This ECN-Echo signaling is similar to ECN signaling in {{ConEx}}. ECN-Echo
mechanism in QUIC provides the number of packets received with CE marks. For
protocols like TCP, the method described in {{ConEx-TCP}} can be employed. As
stated in {{ConEx-TCP}}, such feedback can be further improved using a method
described in {{ACCURATE}}.

## Using E Bit for Passive ECN-Reported Congestion Measurement {#ech-usage}

A network observer can count packets with CE codepoint and determine the
upstream CE-marking rate directly.

Observation points can also estimate ECN-reported end-to-end congestion by
counting packets in this direction with a E bit equal to 1.

The upstream CE-marking rate and end-to-end ECN-reported congestion can provide
information about downstream CE-marking rate. Presence of E bits along with L
bits, however, can somewhat confound precise estimates of upstream and
downstream CE-markings in case the flow contains packets that are not
ECN-capable.


# Protocol Ossification Considerations  {#ossification}

Accurate loss information is not critical to the operation of any protocol,
though its presence for a sufficient number of flows is important for the
operation of networks.

The loss bits are amenable to "greasing" described in {{?RFC8701}}, if the
protocol designers are not ready to dedicate (and ossify) bits used for loss
reporting to this function. The greasing could be accomplished similarly to the
Latency Spin bit greasing in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Namely, implementations could
decide that a fraction of flows should not encode loss information in the loss
bits and, instead, the bits would be set to arbitrary values. The observers
would need to be ready to ignore flows with loss information more resembling
noise than the expected signal.


# Security Considerations

Passive loss observation has been a part of the network operations for a long
time, so exposing loss information to the network does not add new security
concerns for protocols that are currently observable.

In the absence of upstream packet loss, the Q bit signal does not provide any
information that cannot be observed by simply counting packets transiting a
network path. In the presence of upstream packet loss, the Q bit will disclose
the loss, but this is information about the environment and not the endpoint
state. The L bit signal discloses internal state of the protocol's loss
detection machinery, but this state can often be gleamed by timing packets and
observing congestion controller response. Hence, loss bits do not provide a
viable new mechanism to attack data integrity and secrecy.

## Optimistic ACK Attack

A defense against an Optimistic ACK Attack, decribed in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
involves a sender randomly skipping packet numbers to detect a receiver
acknowledging packet numbers that have never been received. The Q bit signal may
inform the attacker which packet numbers were skipped on purpose and which had
been actually lost (and are, therefore, safe for the attacker to
acknowledge). To use the Q bit for this purpose, the attacker must first receive
at least an entire Q Run of packets, which renders the attack ineffective
against a delay-sensitive congestion controller.

A protocol that is more susceptible to an Optimistic ACK Attack with the loss
signal provided by Q bit and uses a loss-based congestion controller, SHOULD
shorten the current Q Run by the number of skipped packets numbers. For example,
skipping a single packet number will invert the sQuare signal one outgoing
packet sooner.


# Privacy Considerations

To minimize unintentional exposure of information, loss bits provide an explicit
loss signal -- a preferred way to share information per {{!RFC8558}}.

New protocols commonly have specific privacy goals, and loss reporting must
ensure that loss information does not compromise those privacy goals. For
example, {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} allows changing Connection IDs in the middle of a
connection to reduce the likelihood of a passive observer linking old and new
subflows to the same device. A QUIC implementation would need to reset all
counters when it changes the destination (IP address or UDP port) or the
Connection ID used for outgoing packets. It would also need to avoid
incrementing Unreported Loss counter for loss of packets sent to a different
destination or with a different Connection ID.


# IANA Considerations

This document makes no request of IANA.


# Change Log

## Since version 02
- Minor improvement and clarifications

## Since version 01
- Clarified Q Period selection
- Added an optional E (ECN-Echo Event) bit
- Clarified L bit calculation for protocols that allow partial data loss due to
  a change in segmentation (such as TCP)

## Since version 00

- Addressed review comments
- Improved guidelines for privacy protections for QIUC


# Acknowledgments

The sQuare bit was originally suggested by Kazuho Oku in early proposals for
loss measurement and is an instance of the "alternate marking" as defined in
{{!RFC8321}}.
