draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-tsvwg-lossbits.md, before:

---
title: Packet Loss Signaling for Encrypted Protocols
abbrev: loss-bits
docname: draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-tsvwg-lossbits-latest
date: {DATE}
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: Loss Signaling
workgroup: TSVWG
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  compact: yes
  inline: yes
  text-list-symbols: -o*+

author:
  -
    ins: A. Ferrieux
    name: Alexandre Ferrieux
    org: Orange Labs
    email: alexandre.ferrieux@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Hamchaoui
    name: Isabelle Hamchaoui
    org: Orange Labs
    email: isabelle.hamchaoui@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Lubashev
    name: Igor Lubashev
    org: Akamai Technologies
    street: 150 Broadway
    city: Cambridge
    code: 02142
    region: MA
    country: USA
    email: ilubashe@akamai.com

normative:
  IP: RFC0791
  IPv6: RFC8200

informative:
  QUIC-TRANSPORT: I-D.ietf-quic-transport
  TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT: I-D.ietf-tsvwg-transport-encrypt
  GREASE: I-D.ietf-tls-grease

--- abstract

This document describes a protocol-independent method that employs two bits to
allow endpoints to signal packet loss in a way that can be used by network
devices to measure and locate the source of the loss. The signaling method
applies to all protocols with a protocol-specific way to identify packet
loss. The method is especially valuable when applied to protocols that encrypt
transport header and do not allow an alternative method for loss detection.

--- middle

# Introduction

Packet loss is a pervasive problem of day-to-day network operation, and
proactively detecting, measuring, and locating it is crucial to maintaining high
QoS and timely resolution of crippling end-to-end throughput issues. To this
effect, in a TCP-dominated world, network operators have been heavily relying on
information present in the clear in TCP headers: sequence and acknowledgment
numbers, and SACK when enabled. These allow for quantitative estimation of
packet loss by passive on-path observation, and the lossy segment (upstream or
downstream from the observation point) can be quickly identified by moving the
passive observer around.

With encrypted protocols, the equivalent transport headers are encrypted and
passive packet loss observation is not possible, as described in
{{TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT}}.

Since encrypted protocols could be routed by the network differently, and the
fraction of Internet traffic delivered using encrypted protocols is increasing
every year, it is imperative to measure packet loss experienced by encrypted
protocol users directly instead of relying on measuring TCP loss between similar
endpoints.

Following the recommendation in {{!RFC8558}} of making path signals explicit,
this document proposes adding two explicit loss bits to the clear portion of the
protocol headers to restore network operators' ability to maintain high QoS for
users of encrypted protocols. These bits can be added to an unencrypted portion
of a header belonging to any protocol layer, e.g. two most significant its of
the TTL field in IP (see {{IP}}) and IPv6 (see {{IPv6}}) headers or reserved
bits in a QUIC v1 header (see {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}).

# Notational Conventions    {#conventions}

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{!RFC2119}}.

# Loss Bits

The proposal introduces two bits that are to be present in every packet capable
of loss reporting. These are packets that include protocol headers with the loss
bits. Only loss of packets capable of loss reporting is reported using loss
bits.

Whenever this specification refers to packets, it is referring only to packets
capable of loss reporting.

* Q: The "sQuare signal" bit is toggled every N outgoing packets as explained
  below in {{squarebit}}.

* L: The "Loss event" bit is set to 0 or 1 according to the Unreported Loss
  counter, as explained below in {{lossbit}}.

Each endpoint maintains appropriate counters independently and separately for
each connection (each subflow for multipath connections).


## Setting the sQuare Bit on Outgoing Packets {#squarebit}

The sQuare Value is initialized to the Initial Q Value (0 or 1) and is reflected
in the Q bit of every outgoing packet. The sQuare value is inverted after
sending every N packets (Q Period is 2*N).

The choice of the Initial Q Value and Q Period is determined by the protocol
containing Q and L bits. For example, the values can be protocol constants (e.g
"Initial Q Value" is 0, and "Q Period" is 128), or they can be set explicitly
for each connection (e.g. "Initial Q Value" is whatever value the initial packet
has, and "Q Period" is set per a dedicated TCP option on SYN and SYN/ACK).

Observation points can estimate the upstream losses by counting the number of
packets during a half period of the square signal, as described in {{usage}}.


## Setting the Loss Event Bit on Outgoing Packets {#lossbit}

The Unreported Loss counter is initialized to 0, and L bit of every outgoing
packet indicates whether the Unreported Loss counter is positive (L=1 if the
counter is positive, and L=0 otherwise).

The value of the Unreported Loss counter is decremented every time a packet with
L=1 is sent.

The value of the Unreported Loss counter is incremented for every packet that
the protocol declares lost, using whatever loss detection machinery the protocol
employs. If the protocol is able to rescind the loss determination later, the
Unreported Loss counter SHOULD NOT be decremented due to the rescission.

Observation points can estimate the end-to-end loss, as determined by the
upstream endpoint's loss detection machinery, by counting packets in this
direction with a L bit equal to 1, as described in {{usage}}.


# Using the Loss Bits for Passive Loss Measurement {#usage}

There are three sources of observable loss:

* _upstream loss_ - loss between the sender and the observation point
  ({{upstreamloss}})

* _downstream loss_ - loss between the observation point and the destination
  ({{downstreamloss}})

* _observer loss_ - loss by the observer itself that does not cause downstream
  loss ({{observerloss}})

The upstream and downstream loss together constitute _end-to-end loss_
({{endtoendloss}}).

The Q and L bits allow detection and measurement of the types of loss listed
above.


## End-To-End Loss    {#endtoendloss}

The Loss Event bit allows an observer to calculate the end-to-end loss rate by
counting packets with L bit value of 0 and 1 for a given connection. The
end-to-end loss rate is the fraction of packets with L=1.

The simplifying assumption here is that upstream loss affects packets with L=0
and L=1 equally. This may be a simplification, if some loss is caused by
tail-drop in a network device. If the sender congestion controller reduces the
packet send rate after loss, there may be a sufficient delay before sending
packets with L=1 that they have a greater chance of arriving at the observer.


## Upstream Loss   {#upstreamloss}

Blocks of N (half of Q Period) consecutive packets are sent with the same value
of the Q bit, followed by another block of N packets with inverted value of the
Q bit. Hence, knowing the value of N, an on-path observer can estimate the
amount of upstream loss after observing at least N packets. If `p` is the
average number of packets in a block of packets with the same Q value, then the
upstream loss is `1-p/N`.

The observer needs to be able to tolerate packet reordering that can blur the
edges of the square signal.

The Q Period needs to be chosen carefully, since the observation could become
too unreliable in case of packet reordering and loss if Q Period is too
small. However, when Q Period is too large, connections that send fewer than
half Q Period packets do not yield a useful upstream loss measurement.

The observer needs to differentiate packets as belonging to different
connections, since they use independent counters.


## Correlating End-to-End and Upstream Loss    {#losscorrelation}

Upstream loss is calculated by observing the actual packets that did not suffer
the upstream loss. End-to-end loss, however, is calculated by observing
subsequent packets after the sender's protocol detected the loss.  Hence,
end-to-end loss is generally observed with a delay of between 1 RTT (loss
declared due to multiple duplicate acknowledgments) and 1 RTO (loss declared due
to a timeout) relative to the upstream loss.

The connection RTT can sometimes be estimated by timing protocol handshake
messages. This RTT estimate can be greatly improved by observing a dedicated
protocol mechanism for conveying RTT information, such as the Latency Spin bit
of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Whenever the observer needs to perform a computation that uses both upstream and
end-to-end loss rate measurements, it SHOULD use upstream loss rate leading the
end-to-end loss rate by approximately 1 RTT. If the observer is unable to
estimate RTT of the connection, it should accumulate loss measurements over time
periods of at least 4 times the typical RTT for the observed connections.

If the calculated upstream loss rate exceeds the end-to-end loss rate calculated
in {{endtoendloss}}, then either the Q Period is too short for the amount of
packet reordering or there is observer loss, described in {{observerloss}}. If
this happens, the observer SHOULD adjust the calculated upstream loss rate to
match end-to-end loss rate.


## Downstream Loss   {#downstreamloss}

Because downstream loss affects only those packets that did not suffer upstream
loss, the end-to-end loss rate (`e`) relates to the upstream loss rate (`u`) and
downstream loss rate (`d`) as `(1-u)(1-d)=1-e`. Hence, `d=(e-u)/(1-u)`.


## Observer Loss   {#observerloss}

A typical deployment of a passive observation system includes a network tap
device that mirrors network packets of interest to a device that performs
analysis and measurement on the mirrored packets. The observer loss is the loss
that occurs on the mirror path.

Observer loss affects upstream loss rate measurement since it causes the
observer to account for fewer packets in a block of identical Q bit values (see
{{upstreamloss)}). The end-to-end loss rate measurement, however, is unaffected
by the observer loss, since it is a measurement of the fraction of packets with
the set L bit value, and the observer loss would affect all packets equally
(see {{endtoendloss}}).

The need to adjust the upstream loss rate down to match end-to-end loss rate as
described in {{losscorrelation}} is a strong indication of the observer loss,
whose magnitude is between the amount of such adjustment and the entirety of the
upstream loss measured in {{upstreamloss}}.


# Ossification Considerations

Accurate loss information is not critical to the operation of any protocol,
though its presence for a sufficient number of connections is important for the
operation of the networks.

The loss bits are amenable to "greasing" described in {{GREASE}}, if the
protocol designers are not ready to dedicate (and ossify) bits used for loss
reporting to this function. The greasing could be accomplished similarly to the
Latency Spin bit greasing in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Namely, implementations could
decide that a fraction of connections should not encode loss information in the
loss bits and, instead, the bits would be set to arbitrary values. The observers
would need to be ready to ignore connections with loss information more
resembling noise than the expected signal.


# Security Considerations

Passive loss observation has been a part of the network operations for a long
time, so exposing loss information to the network does not add new security
concerns.


# Privacy Considerations

Guarding user's privacy is an important goal for modern protocols and protocol
extensions per {{?RFC7285}}.  While an explicit loss signal -- a preferred way to
share loss information per {{!RFC8558}} -- helps to minimize unintentional
exposure of additional information, implementations of loss reporting must
ensure that loss information does not compromise protocol's privacy goals.

For example, {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} allows changing Connection IDs in the middle of
a connection to reduce the likelihood of a passive observer linking old and new
subflows to the same device. A QUIC implementation would need to reset all
counters when it changes the destination (IP address or UDP port) or the
Connection ID used for outgoing packets. It would also need to avoid
incrementing Unreported Loss counter for loss of packets sent to a different
destinatoin or with a different Connection ID.


# IANA Considerations

This document makes no request of IANA.

# Acknowledgments

The sQuare Bit was originally specified by Kazuho Oku in early proposals for
loss measurement.

Commit message:

Add a reference to a few RFCs and add Change log

draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-tsvwg-lossbits.md, after:

---
title: Packet Loss Signaling for Encrypted Protocols
abbrev: loss-bits
docname: draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-tsvwg-lossbits-latest
date: {DATE}
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: Loss Signaling
workgroup: TSVWG
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  compact: yes
  inline: yes
  text-list-symbols: -o*+

author:
  -
    ins: A. Ferrieux
    name: Alexandre Ferrieux
    org: Orange Labs
    email: alexandre.ferrieux@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Hamchaoui
    name: Isabelle Hamchaoui
    org: Orange Labs
    email: isabelle.hamchaoui@orange.com
  -
    ins: I. Lubashev
    name: Igor Lubashev
    org: Akamai Technologies
    street: 150 Broadway
    city: Cambridge
    code: 02142
    region: MA
    country: USA
    email: ilubashe@akamai.com

normative:
  IP: RFC0791
  IPv6: RFC8200

informative:
  QUIC-TRANSPORT: I-D.ietf-quic-transport
  TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT: I-D.ietf-tsvwg-transport-encrypt
  GREASE: I-D.ietf-tls-grease
  UDP-OPTIONS: I-D.ietf-tsvwg-udp-options
  UDP-SURPLUS: I-D.herbert-udp-space-hdr

--- abstract

This document describes a protocol-independent method that employs two bits to
allow endpoints to signal packet loss in a way that can be used by network
devices to measure and locate the source of the loss. The signaling method
applies to all protocols with a protocol-specific way to identify packet
loss. The method is especially valuable when applied to protocols that encrypt
transport header and do not allow an alternative method for loss detection.

--- middle

# Introduction

Packet loss is a pervasive problem of day-to-day network operation, and
proactively detecting, measuring, and locating it is crucial to maintaining high
QoS and timely resolution of crippling end-to-end throughput issues. To this
effect, in a TCP-dominated world, network operators have been heavily relying on
information present in the clear in TCP headers: sequence and acknowledgment
numbers, and SACK when enabled. These allow for quantitative estimation of
packet loss by passive on-path observation, and the lossy segment (upstream or
downstream from the observation point) can be quickly identified by moving the
passive observer around.

With encrypted protocols, the equivalent transport headers are encrypted and
passive packet loss observation is not possible, as described in
{{TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT}}.

Since encrypted protocols could be routed by the network differently, and the
fraction of Internet traffic delivered using encrypted protocols is increasing
every year, it is imperative to measure packet loss experienced by encrypted
protocol users directly instead of relying on measuring TCP loss between similar
endpoints.

Following the recommendation in {{!RFC8558}} of making path signals explicit,
this document proposes adding two explicit loss bits to the clear portion of the
protocol headers to restore network operators' ability to maintain high QoS for
users of encrypted protocols. These bits can be added to an unencrypted portion
of a header belonging to any protocol layer, e.g. IP (see {{IP}}) and IPv6 (see
{{IPv6}}) headers or extensions, UDP surplus space (see {{UDP-OPTIONS}} and
{{UDP-SURPLUS}}), reserved bits in a QUIC v1 header (see {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}).

# Notational Conventions    {#conventions}

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{!RFC2119}}.

# Loss Bits

The proposal introduces two bits that are to be present in every packet capable
of loss reporting. These are packets that include protocol headers with the loss
bits. Only loss of packets capable of loss reporting is reported using loss
bits.

Whenever this specification refers to packets, it is referring only to packets
capable of loss reporting.

* Q: The "sQuare signal" bit is toggled every N outgoing packets as explained
  below in {{squarebit}}.

* L: The "Loss event" bit is set to 0 or 1 according to the Unreported Loss
  counter, as explained below in {{lossbit}}.

Each endpoint maintains appropriate counters independently and separately for
each connection (each subflow for multipath connections).


## Setting the sQuare Bit on Outgoing Packets {#squarebit}

The sQuare Value is initialized to the Initial Q Value (0 or 1) and is reflected
in the Q bit of every outgoing packet. The sQuare value is inverted after
sending every N packets (Q Period is 2*N). The Q bit represents "packet color"
as defined by {{?RFC8321}}.

The choice of the Initial Q Value and Q Period is determined by the protocol
containing Q and L bits. For example, the values can be protocol constants (e.g
"Initial Q Value" is 0, and "Q Period" is 128), or they can be set explicitly
for each connection (e.g. "Initial Q Value" is whatever value the initial packet
has, and "Q Period" is set per a dedicated TCP option on SYN and SYN/ACK).

Observation points can estimate the upstream losses by counting the number of
packets during a half period of the square signal, as described in {{usage}}.


## Setting the Loss Event Bit on Outgoing Packets {#lossbit}

The Unreported Loss counter is initialized to 0, and L bit of every outgoing
packet indicates whether the Unreported Loss counter is positive (L=1 if the
counter is positive, and L=0 otherwise).

The value of the Unreported Loss counter is decremented every time a packet with
L=1 is sent.

The value of the Unreported Loss counter is incremented for every packet that
the protocol declares lost, using whatever loss detection machinery the protocol
employs. If the protocol is able to rescind the loss determination later, the
Unreported Loss counter SHOULD NOT be decremented due to the rescission.

Observation points can estimate the end-to-end loss, as determined by the
upstream endpoint's loss detection machinery, by counting packets in this
direction with a L bit equal to 1, as described in {{usage}}.


# Using the Loss Bits for Passive Loss Measurement {#usage}

There are three sources of observable loss:

* _upstream loss_ - loss between the sender and the observation point
  ({{upstreamloss}})

* _downstream loss_ - loss between the observation point and the destination
  ({{downstreamloss}})

* _observer loss_ - loss by the observer itself that does not cause downstream
  loss ({{observerloss}})

The upstream and downstream loss together constitute _end-to-end loss_
({{endtoendloss}}).

The Q and L bits allow detection and measurement of the types of loss listed
above.


## End-To-End Loss    {#endtoendloss}

The Loss Event bit allows an observer to calculate the end-to-end loss rate by
counting packets with L bit value of 0 and 1 for a given connection. The
end-to-end loss rate is the fraction of packets with L=1.

The simplifying assumption here is that upstream loss affects packets with L=0
and L=1 equally. This may be a simplification, if some loss is caused by
tail-drop in a network device. If the sender congestion controller reduces the
packet send rate after loss, there may be a sufficient delay before sending
packets with L=1 that they have a greater chance of arriving at the observer.


## Upstream Loss   {#upstreamloss}

Blocks of N (half of Q Period) consecutive packets are sent with the same value
of the Q bit, followed by another block of N packets with inverted value of the
Q bit. Hence, knowing the value of N, an on-path observer can estimate the
amount of upstream loss after observing at least N packets. If `p` is the
average number of packets in a block of packets with the same Q value, then the
upstream loss is `1-p/N`.

The observer needs to be able to tolerate packet reordering that can blur the
edges of the square signal.

The Q Period needs to be chosen carefully, since the observation could become
too unreliable in case of packet reordering and loss if Q Period is too
small. However, when Q Period is too large, connections that send fewer than
half Q Period packets do not yield a useful upstream loss measurement.

The observer needs to differentiate packets as belonging to different
connections, since they use independent counters.


## Correlating End-to-End and Upstream Loss    {#losscorrelation}

Upstream loss is calculated by observing the actual packets that did not suffer
the upstream loss. End-to-end loss, however, is calculated by observing
subsequent packets after the sender's protocol detected the loss.  Hence,
end-to-end loss is generally observed with a delay of between 1 RTT (loss
declared due to multiple duplicate acknowledgments) and 1 RTO (loss declared due
to a timeout) relative to the upstream loss.

The connection RTT can sometimes be estimated by timing protocol handshake
messages. This RTT estimate can be greatly improved by observing a dedicated
protocol mechanism for conveying RTT information, such as the Latency Spin bit
of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Whenever the observer needs to perform a computation that uses both upstream and
end-to-end loss rate measurements, it SHOULD use upstream loss rate leading the
end-to-end loss rate by approximately 1 RTT. If the observer is unable to
estimate RTT of the connection, it should accumulate loss measurements over time
periods of at least 4 times the typical RTT for the observed connections.

If the calculated upstream loss rate exceeds the end-to-end loss rate calculated
in {{endtoendloss}}, then either the Q Period is too short for the amount of
packet reordering or there is observer loss, described in {{observerloss}}. If
this happens, the observer SHOULD adjust the calculated upstream loss rate to
match end-to-end loss rate.


## Downstream Loss   {#downstreamloss}

Because downstream loss affects only those packets that did not suffer upstream
loss, the end-to-end loss rate (`e`) relates to the upstream loss rate (`u`) and
downstream loss rate (`d`) as `(1-u)(1-d)=1-e`. Hence, `d=(e-u)/(1-u)`.


## Observer Loss   {#observerloss}

A typical deployment of a passive observation system includes a network tap
device that mirrors network packets of interest to a device that performs
analysis and measurement on the mirrored packets. The observer loss is the loss
that occurs on the mirror path.

Observer loss affects upstream loss rate measurement since it causes the
observer to account for fewer packets in a block of identical Q bit values (see
{{upstreamloss)}). The end-to-end loss rate measurement, however, is unaffected
by the observer loss, since it is a measurement of the fraction of packets with
the set L bit value, and the observer loss would affect all packets equally
(see {{endtoendloss}}).

The need to adjust the upstream loss rate down to match end-to-end loss rate as
described in {{losscorrelation}} is a strong indication of the observer loss,
whose magnitude is between the amount of such adjustment and the entirety of the
upstream loss measured in {{upstreamloss}}.


# Ossification Considerations

Accurate loss information is not critical to the operation of any protocol,
though its presence for a sufficient number of connections is important for the
operation of the networks.

The loss bits are amenable to "greasing" described in {{GREASE}}, if the
protocol designers are not ready to dedicate (and ossify) bits used for loss
reporting to this function. The greasing could be accomplished similarly to the
Latency Spin bit greasing in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Namely, implementations could
decide that a fraction of connections should not encode loss information in the
loss bits and, instead, the bits would be set to arbitrary values. The observers
would need to be ready to ignore connections with loss information more
resembling noise than the expected signal.


# Security Considerations

Passive loss observation has been a part of the network operations for a long
time, so exposing loss information to the network does not add new security
concerns.


# Privacy Considerations

Guarding user's privacy is an important goal for modern protocols and protocol
extensions per {{?RFC7285}}.  While an explicit loss signal -- a preferred way to
share loss information per {{!RFC8558}} -- helps to minimize unintentional
exposure of additional information, implementations of loss reporting must
ensure that loss information does not compromise protocol's privacy goals.

For example, {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} allows changing Connection IDs in the middle of
a connection to reduce the likelihood of a passive observer linking old and new
subflows to the same device. A QUIC implementation would need to reset all
counters when it changes the destination (IP address or UDP port) or the
Connection ID used for outgoing packets. It would also need to avoid
incrementing Unreported Loss counter for loss of packets sent to a different
destinatoin or with a different Connection ID.


# IANA Considerations

This document makes no request of IANA.


# Change Log

## Since version 00

- Addressed review comments
- Improved guidelines for privacy protections for  QIUC

# Acknowledgments

The sQuare bit was originally suggested by Kazuho Oku in early proposals for
loss measurement.
